{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2868
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 .AppleSystemUIFontMonospaced-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red16\green16\blue16;\red242\green241\blue233;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c7843\c7843\c7451;\cssrgb\c96078\c95686\c92941;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs25\fsmilli12600 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 ETE IT PMO \'97 AI Resource Planning Agent: Technical Specification Phase 1 MVP \'97 Stateful AI agent for resource optimization, portfolio analysis, and decision support. ================================================================ 1. PROJECT OVERVIEW ================================================================ Project Name: ETE IT PMO AI Resource Planning Agent Version: Phase 1 MVP Purpose: Build a persistent AI agent that reads the ETE IT PMO Excel workbook, understands the project portfolio and team capacity, runs constraint-based optimization for resource scheduling, and provides natural language recommendations via a chat interface. Excel remains the source of truth for data entry and executive/board reporting. Problem Statement: The PMO team manually manages 40+ projects across 23 resources using Excel. Determining optimal project schedules, identifying resource bottlenecks, and running what-if scenarios requires navigating 6+ interconnected sheets with complex formulas. The team needs an intelligent layer that can answer capacity questions, flag risks, and recommend optimal schedules \'97 while keeping Excel as the foundation. Key Outcome: A PMO lead can ask: "Can we take on a new 400-hour project with 60% Developer allocation?" and get an immediate answer with impact analysis, trade-off options, and a recommended schedule \'97 all grounded in real data from the Excel workbook. Estimated Effort: 2-3 weeks with one Python developer familiar with APIs and basic cloud deployment. Estimated Monthly Cost: ~$30-70/month (Claude API ~$20-50, hosting ~$10-20). No per-seat licensing. ================================================================ 2. EXCEL DATA MODEL \'97 Source of Truth ================================================================ Workbook: ETE_2026_IT_Budget_Tracker.xlsx (hosted on SharePoint/OneDrive) Access Method: Option A: Microsoft Graph API (if on SharePoint \'97 preferred for real-time access) Option B: openpyxl (Python library \'97 reads .xlsx directly from file share) Option C: OneDrive sync + file watcher (simplest \'97 watch local copy for changes) --- 2a. Project Portfolio Sheet --- Range: Project Portfolio'!A3:AC42 (row 3 = headers, rows 4-42 = projects) Key Columns: A: ID (e.g., ETE-83) | B: Project Name | C: Type | D: Business Portfolio | E: Sponsor/Leader | F: Project Health (ON TRACK, NEEDS SPEC, NOT STARTED, POSTPONED) | G: % Complete (0-100%) | H: Priority (Highest/High/Medium/Low) | I: Start Date | J: Est. End Date | R: Est. Hours | T-AA: Role allocation percentages (BA%, Func%, Tech%, Dev%, Infra%, DBA%, PM%, WMS%) Active Filter: Exclude: Project Health = POSTPONED, % Complete = 100%. Currently ~13 active of 40 total. Priority Rule: ABSOLUTE: Highest > High > Medium > Low. Never delay Highest for Medium. --- 2b. Team Roster Sheet --- Range: Team Roster'!A3:H26 (23 team members) Key Columns: A: Resource name | B: Role (PM, DBA, BA, Functional, Technical, Developer, Infrastructure, WMS) | C: Team | D: Vendor | E: Classification (FTE/Contractor) | F: Rate/Hour | G: Weekly Hrs Available | H: Support Reserve % Current Team: 23 resources: 3 PM, 1 DBA, 4 BA/SME, 2 Functional, 5 Technical, 4 Developer, 3 Infrastructure, 1 WMS --- 2c. RM_Assumptions Sheet --- Time Allocation: Admin 10% + Break/Fix 10% + Project 80% = 100%. Result: 32 project hrs/person/week. SDLC Phase Weights: Discovery 10%, Planning 10%, Design 15%, Build 30%, Test 20%, Deploy 15% = 100% Role Effort Matrix: 8 roles \'d7 6 phases. Example: Developer = 0% Discovery \uc0\u8594  5% Planning \u8594  10% Design \u8594  50% Build \u8594  25% Test \u8594  10% Deploy. This drives demand curves \'97 each role's workload varies by project phase. Critical Rule: Demand for a role is ZERO if the project's role allocation % is 0 in the Portfolio. The agent MUST gate by this \'97 we caught a bug where the Excel model was applying DBA effort to all projects regardless of allocation. ================================================================ 3. AGENT CAPABILITIES ================================================================ --- 3a. Core (MVP) --- Portfolio Status: Answer: "What's the status of Highest projects?" "Which projects are stuck?" "How many projects does Tom lead?" Grounded in live Excel data. Capacity Analysis: Calculate real-time utilization by role. Weekly supply = headcount \'d7 32. Weekly demand = \u931 (Est.Hours \'d7 Role% \'d7 SDLC Phase Effort%) / duration. Thresholds: <80% green, 80-99% yellow, \u8805 100% red. What-If Scenarios: "What if we add a 400-hr project?" \u8594  adds demand, identifies overloaded weeks, generates 2-4 mitigation options with specific numbers. Schedule Optimization: Sort by priority. Place projects on timeline. If any role exceeds 85%, shift lower-priority projects forward until it fits. Never shift Highest/High. Output: recommended dates + shift amounts. Trade-Off Options: When constrained, generate 2-4 options: (A) delay specific projects, (B) add headcount + cost est., (C) reduce scope, (D) accept short overload. Rank by recommendation. Change Detection: Compare current Excel to last snapshot. Report: new projects, status changes, % complete changes, date changes. Proactive at start of each session. --- 3b. Stretch (Phase 1.5) --- Board Summary: Generate plain-English executive summary: active projects, utilization, top risks, decisions made. Write to Excel sheet. Proactive Alerts: Teams/Slack notification when: role > 90%, project stuck > 2 weeks, end date passed with < 90% complete. Trend Analysis: "How has Developer utilization trended over 8 weeks?" Requires storing weekly snapshots. ================================================================ 4. TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE ================================================================ Runtime: Python 3.11+, long-lived process (server, Azure Function, or local PC) AI Model: Claude Sonnet 4 (claude-sonnet-4-20250514) via Anthropic API with tool-use Optimization: Google OR-Tools (free, handles constraint programming). Objective: minimize total delay, constraints: all roles \u8804  85% utilization, priority hierarchy respected. Memory: SQLite database. Tables: portfolio_snapshots (weekly state), decisions (approved actions + reasoning), agent_state (preferences, last run date). Chat Interface: Option A: Streamlit web app (fastest to build, ~50 lines). Option B: Teams bot (best adoption, needs Azure AD setup). Excel Access: openpyxl for direct file read/write. NEVER overwrite Portfolio or Team Roster without explicit user confirmation. Write only to output sheets. ================================================================ 5. SYSTEM PROMPT (Draft) ================================================================ You are the ETE IT PMO Resource Planning Agent. You help the PMO team make data-driven resource allocation decisions. RULES: \'95 Highest priority = immovable. Never delay. \'95 High priority = minimal flex (\u8804 2 weeks). \'95 Medium/Low = flexible. Delay these first. \'95 Target utilization: 85%. Red \u8805 100% must be resolved. \'95 Demand = Est.Hours \'d7 Role% \'d7 SDLC Phase Effort% / Duration. Only if Role% > 0. \'95 Always provide 2-4 concrete options with specific numbers. \'95 Never overwrite source sheets without confirmation. \'95 Lead with the answer, then supporting detail. \'95 Cite specific numbers: "Developer at 106%" not "Developer is overloaded". ================================================================ 6. IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ================================================================ Week 1: Foundation Day 1-2: Excel Connector (read_portfolio, read_roster, read_assumptions) Day 3-4: Claude API + tool-use integration + system prompt Day 5: Memory store (SQLite, save/load/compare snapshots) Week 2: Intelligence Day 6-8: OR-Tools optimization engine (constraint solver for scheduling) Day 9-10: What-if scenario engine (add project, lose resource, shift dates) Week 3: Interface Day 11-12: Streamlit chat UI or Teams bot Day 13-14: End-to-end testing with real data (5 core scenarios) Day 15: Deployment + team training ================================================================ 7. SUCCESS CRITERIA ================================================================ Accuracy: Utilization calculations match Excel within 1% tolerance. Speed: All queries answered in <10 seconds (Excel read + Claude API + optimization). Memory: Correctly identifies changes between sessions unprompted. Optimization: All roles \u8804 85% in leveled schedule. No Highest project delayed. Total delay minimized. Adoption: PMO lead uses agent \u8805 3x/week within 2 weeks of deployment. Board Ready: Agent-generated summary needs <5 min of editing for board deck. ================================================================ 8. RISKS & MITIGATIONS ================================================================ Stale Data: If Excel not saved/synced, agent reads old data. Mitigation: show "Data as of: [timestamp]" in every response. AI Hallucination: Agent could generate plausible wrong numbers. Mitigation: every claim must trace to a tool call with cited source data. Accidental Overwrite: Agent writes to wrong cells. Mitigation: hard-code whitelist of writable sheets (RM_Gantt, Board_Summary). Require confirmation. Impractical Schedule: Algorithm shifts project 16 weeks. Mitigation: cap max shift by priority (Highest:0, High:2, Medium:8, Low:16 weeks). Adoption Risk: Team doesn't use it. Mitigation: start with PMO lead only, prove value, then expand. Excel stays primary interface.}